.\" $Id: sockd.conf.5,v 1.16 1999/05/26 11:19:02 karls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. The above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"    disclaimer must appear in all copies of the software, derivative works
.\"    or modified versions, and any portions thereof, aswell as in all
.\"    supporting documentation.
.\" 2. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Inferno Nettverk A/S requests users of this software to return to
.\"
.\"  Software Distribution Coordinator  or  sdc@inet.no
.\"  Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\"  Oslo Research Park
.\"  Gaustadaléen 21
.\"  N-0349 Oslo
.\"  Norway
.\"
.\" any improvements or extensions that they make and grant Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\" the rights to redistribute these changes.
.\"
.TH SOCKD.CONF 5 "December 3, 1998"
.SH NAME
sockd.conf \- socks server configuration file syntax
.SH DESCRIPTION
The configuration file for \fBsockd\fP controls the both access control for
the server and logging.  It is divided into two parts, serversettings
and rules.  A line can be commented using the standard comment
character \fB#\fP.
.SH SERVERSETTINGS
The serversettings control the generic behaviour of the server.  Each
keyword is separated from it's value by a \fB':'\fP character.
.IP \fBlogouput\fP
This value controls where the server sends logoutput.  It can
be either \fBsyslog\fP, \fBstdout\fP, \fBstderr\fP, a filename, or
a combination.
.IP \fBinternal\fP
The internal address.  Connections will only be accepted on this address.
Multiple \fBinternal\fP lines may be given.
.IP \fBexternal\fP
The address to be used for outgoing connections.
.IP \fBmethod\fP
A list of acceptable authentication methods, in order of preference.
Supported values are \fBusername\fP and \fBnone\fP.
.IP \fBuser.privileged\fP
Username which will be used for doing privileged operations.
.IP \fBuser.notprivileged\fP
User which the server runs as most of the time.
.IP \fBuser.libwrap\fP
User used to execute libwrap commands.
.IP \fBcompatibility\fP
With the \fBsameport\fP keyword, the server attempts to use the same
port on the server and the client.  This functionality is the default, but
when this option is given it will also be done with ports below 1024.
The \fBreuseaddr\fP keyword might solve problems when the
bind extension is used.
.IP \fBsrchost\fP
With the \fBnomismatch\fP keyword, the server will not accept
connects from addresses having a mismatch between dns address and hostname.
Default is to accept them.
With the \fBnounknown\fP keyword, the server will not accept connects
from addresses without a dns record.  Default is to accept them.
.IP \fBconnecttimeout\fP
The number of seconds a client has to send the request after a connect.
Set it to 0 for forever.
.IP \fBiotimeout\fP
The number of seconds an established connection can be idle.  Set it
to 0 for forever.
.SH RULES
There are two sets of rules.  Rules prefixed with \fBclient\fP are
checked to see if the client is allowed to connect.  These should not
use hostnames (on ip addresses), for security and performance reasons.
The other rules are checked after the request has been accepted.  In
the client context \fBto\fP means the address the request is accepted
on, otherwise it means the client's destination address.  The rules
specify a \fBfrom\fP/\fBto\fP ipmask pair and a \fBpass\fP or
\fBdeny\fP keyword which determines if connections matching the
netmask are allowed or not.  In addition to the netmask there are a
set of extra keywords which can be given.  The format of each
rules contents is:
.IP \fBprotocol\fP
The rule applies only to the given protocols.  Valid values are
\fBtcp\fP and \fBudp\fP.
.IP \fBfrom\fP
The rule applies only to requests coming from the address given as value.
.IP \fBto\fP
The rule applies only to requests going to the address given as value.
.IP \fBcommand\fP
The rule applies only to the given commands.  Valid commands
are \fBbind\fP, \fBbindreply\fP, \fBconnect\fP, \fBudpassociate\fP.
Can be used instead, or to complement, \fBprotocol\fP.
.IP \fBlibwrap\fP
The server will pass the line to libwrap for execution.
.IP \fBlog\fP
Used to control logging.  Accepted keywords are \fBconnect\fP,
\fBdisconnect\fP, \fBdata\fP and \fBiooperation\fP.
.IP \fBmethod\fP
Require that the connection be established using one of the
given methods.
Valid values are the same as in the global \fBmethod\fP line.
.IP \fBproxyprotocol\fP
The rule applies only to requests using the given proxyprotocol.
Valid proxyprotocols are \fBsocks_v4\fP and \fBsocks_v5\fP.
.SH EXAMPLES
See the example directory in the distribution.
.SH FILES
.I /etc/sockd.conf
.SH AUTHORS
For Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway:
 Michael Shuldman <michaels@inet.no>: Design and implementation.
 Karl-André Skevik <karls@inet.no>: Autoconf and porting.
.SH SEE ALSO
sockd(8), hosts_access(5)
