.\" $Id: socks.conf.5,v 1.27 2005/12/19 14:22:16 michaels Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. The above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"    disclaimer must appear in all copies of the software, derivative works
.\"    or modified versions, and any portions thereof, aswell as in all
.\"    supporting documentation.
.\" 2. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Inferno Nettverk A/S requests users of this software to return to
.\"
.\"  Software Distribution Coordinator  or  sdc@inet.no
.\"  Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\"  Oslo Research Park
.\"  Gaustadalléen 21
.\"  NO-0349 Oslo
.\"  Norway
.\"
.\" any improvements or extensions that they make and grant Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\" the rights to redistribute these changes.
.\"
.TH SOCKS.CONF 5 "February 17, 2001"
.SH NAME
socks.conf \- socks client configuration file syntax
.SH DESCRIPTION
The configuration file for the socks client library allow control over
logging and server selection.  It is divided into two parts,
miscellaneous settings and routes.  A line can be commented using the
standard comment character \fB#\fP.
.SH FORMAT
The miscellaneous settings have a keyword followed by a colon and the
value.
.TP
\fBdebug\fP
Setting this field to 1 turns on debugging.
.TP
\fBlogoutput\fP
This value controls where the sends logoutput.  It can
be either \fBsyslog\fP, \fBstdout\fP, \fBstderr\fP, a filename, or
a combination.
.IP \fBresolveprotocol\fP
The protocol used to resolve hostnames.
Valid values are \fBudp\fP (default), \fBtcp\fP and \fBfake\fP.
.TP
.SH ROUTES
The routes are specified with a \fBroute\fP keyword.
Inside a pair of parens ({}) a set of keywords control the behavior of
the route.
Each \fBroute\fP can contain
three address specifications; \fBfrom\fP, \fBto\fP and \fBvia\fP.
A route is selected for a connection based on the values within the
\fBroute\fP block.  The \fBroute\fP block can contain the following:
.TP
.SH ADDRESSES
Each address field can consist of a ipaddress (and where meaningful,
a netmask, separated from the ipaddress by a '\fB/\fP' sign.), a hostname,
or a domainname (designated by the leading '\fB.\fP').
Each address can be followed by a optional \fBport\fP specifier.

.IP \fBfrom\fP
The route is used only by requests coming from the address given as value.
.IP \fBto\fP
The route is used only by requests going to the address given as value.
.IP \fBvia\fP
Address of socks server to be used for the connection.
.IP \fBport\fP
Parameter to \fBfrom\fP, \fBto\fP and \fBvia\fP.  Accepts the keywords
\fBeq/=, neq/!=, ge/>=, le/<=, gt/>, lt/<\fP followed by a number.
A portrange can also be given as "port <start #> - <end #>", which
will match all port numbers within the range <start #> and <end #>.
.IP \fBcommand\fP
The server supports the given commands.  Valid commands
are \fBbind\fP, \fBbindreply\fP, \fBconnect\fP, \fBudpassociate\fP
and \fBudpreply\fP. 
and \fBudpreply\fP.  Can be used instead of, or to complement,
\fBprotocol\fP.
.IP \fBmethod\fP
List of authentication methods the \fBclient\fP supports and which to
offer the server.  Currently supported values are \fBnone\fP and
\fBusername\fP.
.IP \fBprotocol\fP
The protocols the server supports.
Supported values are \fBtcp\fP and \fBudp\fP.
.IP \fBproxyprotocol\fP
The proxy protocols the server supports.
Currently supported values are \fBsocks_v4\fP, \fBsocks_v5\fP,
and \fBhttp_v1.0\fP.
.SH EXAMPLES
See the example directory in the distribution.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBSOCKS_USERNAME\fP
Use \fBSOCKS_USERNAME\fP as the username when doing username
authentication.
.TP
\fBSOCKS_PASSWORD\fP
Use \fBSOCKS_PASSWORD\fP as the password when doing username
authentication.  Not recommended as other users on the system 
might be able to see your password.
.SH FILES
.I /etc/socks.conf
.SH AUTHORS
For Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway:
 Michael Shuldman <michaels@inet.no>: Design and implementation.
 Karl-Andre' Skevik <karls@inet.no>: Autoconf and porting.
.SH SEE ALSO
sockd(8) sockd.conf(5)
.Pp
Information about new releases and other related issues can be found
on the
\fBDante\fP
WWW home page at http://www.inet.no/dante.
.SH BUGS
See the accompanying BUGS file.  New ones should be reported to
dante\-bugs@inet.no.
