.\" $Id: sockd.8,v 1.29 2005/01/24 10:24:20 karls Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2004
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. The above copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"    disclaimer must appear in all copies of the software, derivative works
.\"    or modified versions, and any portions thereof, aswell as in all
.\"    supporting documentation.
.\" 2. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by
.\"      Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Inferno Nettverk A/S requests users of this software to return to
.\"
.\"  Software Distribution Coordinator  or  sdc@inet.no
.\"  Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\"  Oslo Research Park
.\"  Gaustadalléen 21
.\"  NO-0349 Oslo
.\"  Norway
.\"
.\" any improvements or extensions that they make and grant Inferno Nettverk A/S
.\" the rights to redistribute these changes.
.\"
.TH SOCKD 8 "Feb 17, 2001"
.SH NAME
sockd \- network proxyserver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sockd
.RB [ \-DLVdhnv ]
.RB [ \-N
.IR number ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Dante
implements the socks standard and can function as a firewall between networks.
.PP
.B Dante
relays TCP and UDP both from outside the network and in, and from inside
and out.
.PP
The options are as follows:
.TP
.B \-D
.B Dante
will detach from the controlling terminal and run in
the background as a system daemon.
.TP
.B \-L
Displays the license
.B Dante
comes under.
.TP
.BI \-N number
.B Dante
will fork of
.I number
copies of itself when starting.  Can be used for very busy servers.
.TP
.B \-V
Verifies config file and exits.
.TP
.B \-d
Enables debugging.
.TP
.BI \-f file
.B Dante
will read its configuration from
.IR file .
.TP
.B \-h
Shows the currently valid options.
.TP
.B \-n
Disables TCP keep-alive messages.  Normally
.B Dante
enables TCP keep-alive messages so that connections from machines that
have crashed or for other reasons no longer can be reached time out.
.TP
.B \-v
Displays
.B Dante
version.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B TMPDIR
Use
.B TMPDIR
for temporary files.  Since
.B Dante
uses lockfiles it is recommended that
.B TMPDIR
be set to a (local) filesystem with low latency.
.SH FILES
.TP
/etc/sockd.conf
.B Dante
server configuration file.
.SH AUTHORS
For Inferno Nettverk A/S, Norway:
 Michael Shuldman <michaels@inet.no>: Design and implementation.
 Karl-Andre' Skevik <karls@inet.no>: Autoconf and porting.
.SH SEE ALSO
socks.conf(5) sockd.conf(5)
.PP
Information about new releases and other related issues can be found
on the
.B Dante
WWW home page at http://www.inet.no/dante.
.SH BUGS
See the accompanying BUGS file.  New ones should be reported to
dante\-bugs@inet.no.
